e :389263491409977986099492708162379040578860053202851003849443831378701
n :679372223375244767426661823611571709377236531593801193332198472747214909
p :780535675704985143085937429075336653
q :870392276127072787672802596403119153
d :217428582816700655045178675438500694215051455783402454692425822854200325

PlainText:

Twilight of the Superheroes

The Interminable Ramble

An unpublished series proposal for DC Comics by Alan Moore
The Introduction
Okay... I'm sure this is going to be an interminable ramble as these 
things usually are, but I first want to set down my thoughts on the 
whole idea of mass crossovers, partly in response to Paul's letter on 
the subject and partly just to clarify my thinking for myself. 
Hopefully, somewhere along the line you might catch a glimpse of some 
of the logic behind the story outline that follows and will thus be 
able to make a little more sense of my reasons for doing that way.
Firstly, as I see the commercial side, taking into account what Paul 
was kind enough to pass on to me, the perfect mass crossover would be 
something like the following: it would have a sensible and logical 
reason for crossing over with other titles, so that the readers who 
were prompted to try a new title as a result of the crossover or vice 
versa didn't feel cheated by some tenuous linkage of storylines that 
was at best spurious and at worst nonexistent. It would provide a 
strong and resonant springboard from which to launch a number of new 
series or with which to revitalize old ones again in a manner that was 
not obviously crassly exploitative so as to insult the reader's 
intelligence. With an eye to the merchandising that Marvel managed to 
spin out of Secret Wars, I think it's safe to assume that if it were 
possible to credibly spin role playing games, toys, "Waiting for 
Twilight" posters and T-shirts and badges and all the rest of that 
stuff from the title, then that would be a good idea too. Ideally, it 
might even be possible, while appealing to the diehard superhero 
junkie, to produce a central story idea simple, powerful and resonant 
enough to bear translation to other media. I mean, I know that I'm 
probably still intoxicated by the Watchmen deal, but it never hurts to 
allow for these things as a possibility, does it?

Okay, so assuming that the above is an accurate summary of what, 
ideally, DC would like to see happen with the title commercially, then 
I'll go onto tackle the other pertinent areas of concern with an eye to 
that and then hopefully tie the whole lot together at the end before 
moving on to the actual plot outline. If I don't manage that and just 
forget and wander off at a tangent or something then I'm afraid I'll 
have to ask you to bear with me. As long as I don't start 
free-associating about my childhood then we should be okay. The first 
of these other pertinent areas relates to the effect of the storyline 
in question upon the DC Universe itself, and in response to this I 
figure that perhaps I ought to outline briefly my thoughts upon 
crossovers of this magnitude in general.

For one thing, they require some very hard thinking about in advance if 
they're not going to generate more problems than they solve, and in 
thinking about something which will affect every book that the company 
publishes, if only in subtle ways, then one obviously has to be very 
careful. I should say that as yet, although I saw the outlines I 
haven't read any of the Legends series or its crossovers, mainly by 
reason of not having got out to a comic shop recently. The premise, if 
I understand it correctly, looked very good: it seemed to be attempting 
to give a sort of resonant mythic context to the DC pantheon while at 
the same time establishing a more vigorous social context for the 
assembled characters in terms of its storyline, thus drawing the whole 
DC continuity together into an interesting whole, which is exactly what 
needs doing in the wake of the Crisis. The more we can reinforce the 
idea of the DC Universe as a magical and fascinating concept in itself, 
assuming that those are our aims, then the more successful we'll be in 
keeping readers hooked upon that universe and on the books that 
chronicle its various phenomena.

Of course, this approach isn't without its problems. If you don't do it 
right, if your assembled multitude of characters look merely banal, 
which I personally believe happened with Secret Wars (although that may 
be mere personal prejudice on my part), then your entire continuity is 
cheapened in the long term along with its credibility, whatever the 
short term benefits in terms of sales might be. When this happens, your 
only recourse is to greater acts of debasement in order to attract 
reader attention, more deaths to appease the arena crowd element in the 
fan marketplace, eventually degenerating into a geek show.

Then there are the unintentional injuries in internal logic that can be 
unwittingly inflicted upon the mass continuity by such a venture, 
whatever the individual merits of the creators or their efforts, purely 
by the vast organizational problems that a project of this size seems 
to encounter. To explain what I mean, I should perhaps look at a series 
that I have read, that being Marv and George's excellent Crisis on 
Infinite Earths. Although the motive was pure and the aim true with 
regard to Crisis, I can't help feeling that somewhere along the line, 
in the attempt to consolidate and rationalize the DC Cosmos, a 
situation even more potentially destabilizing and precarious was 
created. Instead of a parallel Earth cosmology that was, if the reader 
was sensible enough to overlook obvious discrepancies as what they were 
(i.e. simple mistakes), relatively easy to understand, in the wake of 
Crisis and related seismic impacts upon the continuity such as John 
Byrne's new Superman books we have a situation far less defined and 
precise. In the wake of the time-altering at the end of the Crisis we 
are left with a universe where the entire past continuity of DC, for 
the most part, simply never happened. While I understand that Paul is 
attempting to sort out the Legion/Superboy problems over in LSH at the 
moment, and that other writers are tackling similar discrepancies, the 
fact remains that by far the larger part of DC's continuity will simply 
have to be scrapped and consigned to one of Orwell's memory holes along 
with a large amount of characters who, more than simply being dead, are 
now unpeople.

I believe this is dangerous for a couple of reasons. Firstly, by 
establishing the precedent of altering time, you are establishing an 
unconscious context for all stories that take place in the future, as 
well as for those which took place (or rather didn't take place) in the 
past. The readers of long standing, somewhere along the line, are going 
to have some slight feeling that all the stories that they followed 
avidly during their years of involvement with the book have been in 
some way invalidated, that all those countless plotlines weren't 
leading to anything more than what is in some respects an arbitrary 
cut-off point. By extension, the readers of today might well be left 
with the sensation that the stories they are currently reading are of 
less significance or moment because, after all, at some point ten years 
in the future some comic book omnipotent, be it an editor or the 
Spectre, can go back in time and erase the whole slate, ready to start 
again. I myself felt something similar at the end of the first Superman 
film, when he turns time back to save Lois. It ruined the small but 
genuine enjoyment that I'd got from that first movie and destroyed all 
credibility for any of the following sequels as far as I was concerned.

I know that the average eight year old reader in the street is not 
thinking these things consciously while buying his monthly batch of 
titles. Probably the average seventeen or twenty five year old reader 
isn't either, although that's more open to debate. My point is that the 
large and largely incomprehensible tides of public favor or dismissal 
that determine the success of a title are often influenced by very 
subtle things far below the waterline. I don't think it's too 
high-faluting to assume, for example, that the current success of the 
Teenage Superhero Group book has more than a little to do with the 
current massive sense of instability pervading our culture, especially 
with respect to instabilities in the family structure. I firmly believe 
that both this and the current seeming obsession with a strict formal 
continuity are some sort of broad response from an audience whose 
actual lives are spent living in a continuity far more uncertain and 
complex than anything ever envisaged by a comic book. I believe that 
one of the things that the comic fan is looking for in his multi-title 
crossover epics is some sense of a sanely ordered cosmos not offered to 
him or her by the news headlines or the arguments of their parents over 
breakfast.

That isn't to say that it's healthy or necessarily desirable to fulfill 
this fundamentally escapist sort of urge. I myself would feel 
uncomfortable if the imaginary reality I was offering my readers was 
intended as a pacifier rather than as something to make them think 
about their own reality. I'd cite Watchmen as an example of how it's 
possible to fulfill the requirements of a continuity much more strict 
and rigidly defined than is usual while still making some sort of 
relevant point, hopefully, about the real world that the book's readers 
are living in.

Attendant to this, there are a number of people in the industry (and in 
my opinion they have a good case even if I'm undecided about the right 
means to carry it off) who feel that it's time to break down the 
continuity and try to get rid of a lot of the rather anal and obsessive 
attitudes that have been allowed to dominate the marketplace and to 
some degree have hindered it in its periodic attempts to be taken 
seriously. I suppose a shining example of this would be Frank's Dark 
Knight, which, while it doesn't seem bothered about fitting into any 
graven-in-stone continuity, does service to the legend of Batman and 
brilliantly redefines the character for an eighties audience, and 
nobody really seems to care much how this all fits into the continuity 
because it's such a bloody good story. Will Jason Todd really die? Will 
all the superheroes leave Earth to Superman and his government pals? 
Will Oliver Queen really get his arm burned off at the elbow in a fight 
with Clark Kent and become an embittered urban terrorist? Who cares?

The readers seem quite capable of accepting that this may or may not 
happen in the future, without getting worked up and starting to chew 
through their own arms over how the idea of alternate possible futures 
fits in with the Crisis idea that there is only one timestream with no 
possibility of alternate pasts, presents or futures.

Okay... so on one hand we have an audience thirsty for the stability 
that an ordered continuity gives them, and on the other hand we have 
good creative reasons for throwing continuity to the winds altogether. 
Is there any way that these two apparently conflicting notions can both 
be accomplished at once? Yes, I believe there is. I think it is 
possible to create a limited run series that would embrace both these 
attitudes comfortably and fulfill all the other requirements that we've 
gone over concerning crossovers of this type before. I think we could 
come up with a story that, like Legends, casts new light upon all the 
DC characters, and yet does no violence to however their creators and 
current creative teams are handling them in their own titles. Something 
that pulls together the threads of the DC Universe in an interesting 
and revealing way, while at the same time remaining simple enough in 
construction so that the chances for any screw-ups in the crossover 
continuity are diminished or avoided altogether.
This last point is important. Looking at the practicalities of the 
situation with the insight that Crisis has afforded us, it is possible 
to see the various practical problems which have emerged and which are 
unlikely to be solved by vigorous debating between the parties or sides 
involved. Firstly, there will almost certainly be some writers or 
artists who do not really want to involve their stories with the 
crossover, whether they say so or not. Making them "toe the line" if 
they're vocal about it or taking comfort from the fact that most 
people, even if they don't like the idea, will go along with it for the 
sake of a quiet life clearly isn't practical when you're dealing with 
writers and artists. If they aren't motivated by an idea, while it is 
theoretically possible to force them to adapt to it, it isn't possible 
to ensure that you'll get better than a mediocre story out of them, 
thus cheapening the whole overall concept to some degree. It seems to 
me much more workable to come up with a concept by means of which 
whatever individual writers choose to do or not to do in their own 
books will have relevance to the crossover, whether they necessarily 
intend it to or not. If they choose to involve themselves actively in 
the crossover, then that's fine. If they refuse to do so, then the very 
act of refusing to do anything about the crossover also becomes part of 
the overall storyline, without doing any violence to the continuity of 
the books involved at all. If the mechanics of how all this is to be 
achieved seem a little far fetched at this stage then I'd ask you to 
bear with me until after the story outline, at which point I'll attempt 
to demonstrate how the outline fulfills the various criteria that I'm 
defining here, including the next pertinent area on our agenda after 
the demands of commerce and continuity have been covered, this being 
the purely creative opportunities and pitfalls involved.

Creatively, there is an immediate aesthetic problem in the multi-title 
crossover in that, baldly put, it is very easy to strain the 
credibility of the entire universe by putting certain characters next 
to each other. Swamp Thing and Blue Devil spring immediately to mind, 
or Sgt. Rock and The Legion of Super-Heroes. In such juxtapositions, 
the flawed seams of the illusion of unity that we're trying to create 
become most apparent, and some thought should be given to a way of 
avoiding this distracting effect. There is also the very real 
possibility that any storyline involving so many characters in more 
than a superficial fashion is going to degenerate into incoherence and 
gibberish, becoming a sort of comic book babel of difficult-to-explain 
powers and origins and characterizations topped off with a muddy cosmic 
conclusion, some of which I feel that I certainly fell prey to in my 
recent "Crisis in Heaven/American Gothic" conclusion in Swamp Thing and 
am anxious to avoid repeating here.

The creative plus side of the equation is more dependent upon the 
tastes and leanings of the creative people involved, in this instance 
myself and whoever we get to draw this thing and work with me on it. 
For my part, speaking purely subjectively for the moment, what I'd like 
to do creatively with the series, above and beyond the creative 
satisfaction to me and in fulfilling all the criteria above, is to 
create a storyline that lent the whole superhero phenomenon, the whole 
cosmos and concept a context that was intensely mythic and we extracted 
from the characters involved in it their last ounce of mythic 
potential, aiming at coming up with something that cements the link 
between superheroes and the Gods of legend by attempting something as 
direct and resonant as the original legends themselves. One legend in 
particular will be the main thematic drift of the storyline, this being 
the Norse legend of Ragnarok, twilight of the Gods.

The Storyline Itself

Okay... assuming that six pages is enough for preliminaries, we'll now 
move to a discussion of the storyline itself. Please bear in mind that 
firstly, since the story has time travel as one of its central motifs, 
it's often difficult to present events in a clear chronological 
sequence without getting muddled, for which I apologize in advance. 
Secondly, since I myself don't have all the fine details filled in 
yet... unless those details occur to me over the course of this 
writing, which often happens... then there are going to be a few areas 
where the plot is maybe fuzzy or the storyline seems flatter and less 
inspiring than the areas surrounding it. I hope these don't detract too 
much from your enjoyment of the idea, since these will be things that 
will be polished up to their final shine in the actual scripting. I'd 
again cite Watchmen as an example of how much of this stuff only finds 
its way in at the final draught stage and ask your indulgence wherever 
necessary.
To kick off, I should perhaps explain the overall structure of the 
story, which, incidentally, I'm currently imagining as something in the 
Watchmen format, twelve issues long, twenty-eight pages, no ads, 
although these are just working assumptions and are certainly open to 
alteration at this early stage.
The story is structured so that there is a central "core-narrative" 
which in this case is the tale of the Twilight of the Superheroes, 
taking place at some point in the not too distant future, say twenty or 
thirty years. Around this there is a sort of framing narrative, a 
device which links these hypothetical future events with what is going 
on in the DC continuity at present. This device provides the sort of 
interface between the fairly self-contained story of Twilight and the 
numerous fairly self-contained storylines and continuities of the DC 
Cosmos, and it is achieved as follows: we have agents in the future who 
have managed to send a message back to agents in the present day DC 
continuity, urging them to warn the superhero community of the terrible 
future that is possibly waiting for them, and to avoid it if at all 
possible. (This is not without its own ambiguities, as we shall 
hopefully see, but it provides for the moment the easiest conceptual 
handle with which to grasp the mechanics of all this.) Thus, the agents 
in the present set about reaching various superheroes in the present 
and delivering the warning. Some of those who are warned heed the 
warning, and make decisions in their current doings and lifestyles that 
will hopefully avert what is to happen in the future, even though this 
is by no means definite. Others will ignore the warning and carry on 
with what they were doing, which of course has some relevance, even by 
default, to the outcome of this horrific Gotterdummerung waiting in the 
potential future. Some of the superheroes affected will perhaps not be 
reached at all, and thus remain ignorant of the whole thing, although 
this, too, obviously has relevance to the outcome of what will happen 
in the future. I hope this makes it comprehensible how I hope to solve 
the problem of writers/artists who don't really want to involve 
themselves in the storyline: even if they choose to have their 
characters remain oblivious to everything going on, or to ignore it, 
their actions are having an implied relevance upon what is going on in 
the crossover book while at the same time what happens in the crossover 
book down the line in the future will be seen as having a direct 
relevance to how those characters are perceived in their own books. 
Knowing the fate of characters in even a potential future lends them a 
sort of poignance which is very important and which I'll take a few 
moments to discuss.

As I mentioned in my introduction to Frank's Dark Knight, one of the 
things that prevents superhero stories from ever attaining the status 
of true modern myths or legends is that they are open ended. An 
essential quality of a legend is that the events in it are clearly 
defined in time; Robin Hood is driven to become an outlaw by the 
injustices of King John and his minions. That is his origin. He meets 
Little John, Friar Tuck and all the rest and forms the merry men. He 
wins the tournament in disguise, he falls in love with Maid Marian and 
thwarts the Sheriff of Nottingham. That is his career, including love 
interest, Major Villains and the formation of a superhero group that he 
is part of. He lives to see the return of Good King Richard and is 
finally killed by a woman, firing a last arrow to mark the place where 
he shall be buried. That is his resolution--you can apply the same 
paradigm to King Arthur, Davy Crockett or Sherlock Holmes with equal 
success. You cannot apply it to most comic book characters because, in 
order to meet the commercial demands of a continuing series, they can 
never have a resolution. Indeed, they find it difficult to embrace any 
of the changes in life that the passage of time brings about for these 
very same reasons, making them finally less than fully human as well as 
falling far short of true myth.

The reasons this all came up in the Dark Knight intro was that I felt 
that Frank had managed to fulfill that requirement in terms of Superman 
and Batman, giving us an image which, while perhaps not of their actual 
deaths, showed up how they were at their endings, in their final years. 
Whether this story will actually ever happen in terms of "real" 
continuity is irrelevant: by providing a fitting and affective capstone 
to the Batman legend it makes it just that... a legend rather than an 
endlessly meandering continuity. It does no damage to the current 
stories of Batman in the present, and indeed it does the opposite by 
lending them a certain weight and power by implication and 
association--every minor shift of attitude in the current Bruce Wayne's 
approach to life that might be seen in Batman or Detective over the 
next few years, whether intentionally or not, will provide twinges of 
excitement for the fans who can perceive their contemporary Batman 
inching ever closer to the intense and immortal giant portrayed in the 
Dark Knight chronicles. It also provides a special poignance... while I 
was doing some of the episodes of "Under the Hood" for the Watchmen 
text backup and especially upon seeing Dave's mock-up photographs of 
the Minutemen in their early, innocent days, I felt as if I'd touched 
upon that sense of "look at them all being happy. They didn't know how 
it would turn out" that one sometimes gets when looking at old 
photographs. Dark Knight does this for the Batman to some degree, and 
I'd like to try to do the same for the whole DC Cosmos in Twilight. I 
feel that by providing a capstone of the type mentioned above, but one 
which embraces the whole DC Universe rather than just a couple of its 
heroes, I can lend a coherence and emotional weight to the notion of a 
cohesive DC Universe, thus fulfilling the criteria set out in my 
ramblings about the effect of all this on the idea of DC continuity as 
mentioned above. Being set in a possible future, it does nothing that 
cannot be undone, and yet at the same time has a real and tangible 
effect upon the lives and activities of the various characters in their 
own books and their own current continuities. At the same time, by 
providing that capstone and setting the whole continuity into a 
framework of complete and whole legend, as Frank did in Dark Knight, we 
make the whole thing seem much more of a whole with a weight of 
circumstance and history that might help to cement over any shakiness 
left in the wake of Crisis and its ramifications. Even if we pull the 
threads of these various characters' circumstances together at some 
hypothetical point in the future, this does imply that there is a 
logical pattern or framework for the whole DC Universe, even if the 
resolution of the pattern is at a point thirty years in the 
hypothetical future.

This also fulfills the criteria that I outlined in my opening 
paragraphs concerning the commercial application of the idea. The 
framing device, which links the central story of Twilight to its 
possible crossover points with the mainstream DC Universe, is 
constructed so as to be detachable from the whole. While the whole 
story presented in the actual comic will have cutaways to what is going 
on in the present to show how the crossovers work, the main storyline 
of Twilight will be working towards its resolution unimpeded. Thus, in 
order to make the central storyline comprehensible to a wider audience 
than the trivia-mesmerized hordes of comic fandom, the link with the 
present can be ignored and effectively severed, leaving only a powerful 
and simple central story idea, that of an apocalypse for superfolk 
played out by warring factions against the fascinating backdrop of a 
drastically altered future, with all the plotting, romance and intrigue 
of one of those stirring historical dramas about warring factions 
amongst the Medici or whatever. This central idea... that of a war and 
all its spectacular ramifications, makes it ideal material for a role 
playing game... perhaps the ultimate superhero role playing game. It 
also lends itself nicely to a wide range of other spin-off projects, 
including those in the toy soldier range. The apocalyptic mood of the 
series, tied in with current preoccupations and encapsulated in a 
phrase like the previously mentioned "Waiting for Twilight" could work 
nicely with regard to the advertising campaign as well as giving us a 
range of credible adult items such as badges, posters and T-shirts. The 
storyline would hopefully be resonant enough to provide a good 
springboard for new characters or revitalized old characters, and this 
again would work seamlessly when it came to actually orchestrating all 
this. A character who hasn't been seen yet... say Barbara Randall's 
proposal for a female Flash... could be presented in Twilight as an old 
established character who's been in the Justice League for years. When 
the character appears on the newsstands in her own title some months 
later, this should strike a suitably ominous resonance back to the 
Twilight storyline; is it all coming true? Even if it doesn't all come 
true in every detail, even if, say, she never joins the Justice League, 
mightn't most of it come true? This is the sort of feedback effect that 
I want to foster. In addition to that, any changes that writers have 
planned for their characters in the future could be hinted at directly 
as having happened in the past, so that when they actually happen in 
the regular comic book, they have a meaning beyond that which they have 
on the surface. Even if plans change and certain things don't 
materialize as planned, then even that has its implications with regard 
to the future proposed in Twilight, especially after certain key 
ambiguities that will be introduced in the final issues of this 
proposed crossover.

I should also point out (if only to start a new paragraph... I just 
noticed I didn't draw breath on the last page) that the fact that the 
meat of Twilight's central storyline is detachable from the crossover 
device means that should anyone see any potential in the ultimate 
superhero movie, bearing in mind that DC currently own almost all of 
the really important superhero icons imprinted on the mass 
consciousness and could thus perhaps come up with something that 
legitimately laid claim to that title, then it will be simple to detach 
the central idea from the off-putting clutter of a massive continuity 
such as would almost certainly alienate the average non comic fan 
moviegoer. I'm talking about characters such as Superman, Batman, 
Wonder Woman, the Marvel Family, Blackhawk, Plastic Man, the Shadow and 
all the other truly classic and publicly recognizable characters that 
DC are fortunate enough to have access to. Handled in the right way, 
with the inclusion of these classic figures, the Twilight storyline 
could be printed as a spectacular and epic finale to the whole 
essential superhero dream. Like I say, anyway, it never hurts to 
consider these angles, just in case.

Okay, so now that the actual mechanics of this linking/framing device 
have been discussed, perhaps it would help if I told you what they 
actually are. Bear in mind that the details of this are subject to 
change, as long as the overall idea is sound, since I'm not absolutely 
sure about forthcoming events in the DC Universe that might invalidate 
some of this. I'm confident there'll be a way around any such problems 
anyway, so the following should still be fairly sound and useful.
The first thing we do is to solve the paradox mentioned earlier, 
concerning "Does Dark Knight really happen in the future?" and the 
attendant schism between those who want a concrete universe and those 
who want endless possibility free of the restrictions of a rigid 
cross-title continuity. At the same time, I'd also like to put right 
something that has bothered me since the resolution of Crisis, namely 
the fact that I actually like parallel world stories and that a lot of 
other creative people enjoy the freedom that gives them too. Some of 
the better stories in DC's history have been those directly related to 
the idea of alternate Earths (including Crisis itself, paradoxically 
enough), and there are a lot of brilliant imaginary stories which 
display the same urges and the same ideas at work, albeit outside 
mainstream continuity. What I propose is something that would allow for 
the possibility of alternate world stories as well as the possibility 
of revisiting old discarded continuities that still have charm without 
opening up the whole "Earth-One through -Fifteen" problem that prompted 
the Crisis in the first place. It will also be an idea central to the 
whole concept of this framing/linking device with which we connect the 
events of Twilight with the current continuity. What I propose, 
basically, is something like the following, subject to input by any 
creative people with prior claims on the characters I'm suggesting, of 
course...

Firstly, I understand that there is to be some restriction upon time 
travel in the revised post-Crisis continuity, which is all well and 
good by me. To consolidate the importance of these restrictions and 
their reverberations upon the various books that use time travel as a 
motif, I suggest that, as an example, some members of the Legion of 
Super-Heroes should volunteer for a reconnaissance mission exploring 
the time stream and testing its new limits with regard to their 
vehicles. Those Legionnaires might be selected for this that me and 
Paul have agreed between us are appropriate. At the same time, in any 
other books that might have time travel problems, it could be mentioned 
in passing that from our own era, Professor Rip Hunter was currently 
investigating the phenomenon in his time top.

Okay... now if Paul and Karen and everybody else involved are amenable 
to this, then I figure the next step is to introduce a scheme by the 
Time Trapper. The Time Trapper, living up to his name, intends to set 
up a sort of temporal fluke field in the timestream that will in effect 
make time travel in or out of this area all but impossible, thus 
trapping the Legionnaires who volunteered or were selected in the past, 
unable to return. I suggest that the Legionnaires chosen should be some 
that Paul is able to do without for a few months, and maybe those that 
he'd like to see some changes made to. Like I say, these details can be 
sorted out later. The Time Trapper is maybe planning to trap these 
various Legionnaires in the past so that they cannot help prevent some 
plot he is planning to devil the Legion with in the future and might 
conceivably be useful as a plot springboard to Paul over in the 
Legion's own book. The important thing in terms of Twilight is that the 
Time Trapper successfully sets up his fluke field, which effectively 
distorts a whole stretch of the timestream from, say, 1990 to the year 
2010. With very few exceptions, nothing can get in or out of this Time 
Tangle. Furthermore, as a result of an effect of the fluke field upon a 
continuum already sorely abused during the reality-reordering of the 
Crisis on Infinite Earths, within this bubble of fluke time, numerous 
alternate realities again become possible, if only for a limited thirty 
year stretch. Although we won't be exploring any of these realities 
save for one in Twilight, the possibilities there for story ideas in 
other books are limitless. Within the fluke, there are maybe worlds 
where the imaginary stories happened: what would the world of Superman 
Red/Superman Blue be like if you were to visit it twenty years on? Or 
the world in "The Death of Superman". Is there a world perhaps like the 
old Earth-Two or a world in which Dark Knight takes place? As well as 
opening up a wealth of story possibilities without opening up the 
attendant can of worms, it also provides a convenient trash bin for 
every story that DC ever published that didn't fit in with the 
continuity. Brother Power? It happened in the fluke. Prez? The fluke. 
The Rainbow Batman? In the fluke. Because travel by people in the 
mainstream continuities into the fluke zone of the timestream would be 
presented as all but impossible except in exceptional circumstances, 
the chance for the infinite number of maybe-worlds in the fluke to 
spill over and damage the mainstream continuity would be minimal.

Okay... so while the LSH volunteers are exploring the altered Post 
Legends Timestream, the Time Trapper springs his ultimate Time Trap and 
the fluke comes into existence. The group of Legionnaires find 
themselves trapped upon an Earth, circa the year 2000, albeit only one 
of the Earths A.D. 2000 that now exist in the flux. As a result of the 
sudden moire effect rippling across the timestream from the fluke, any 
time travelers in the timestream at the time of the flux coming into 
operation (which, as we shall see later, poses an interesting little 
subparadox) are drawn to the same point, trapped within the enclosed 
multiple continuities of the flux. These include Rip Hunter and some 
others who I'll detail later. They find themselves cut off from their 
own times on a world in which the superhero ideal seems to have gone 
badly awry, with events seeming to be leading to a terribly apocalyptic 
war between superheroes. As they struggle to find a way to return to 
their own times, they experience the terrible events which are going on 
in the world around them, these events making up the central 
core-narrative of Twilight. Eventually, they find a way to escape, the 
Legionnaires and others returning to their respective times while Rip 
Hunter returns to the present, which is where our story proper 
"begins", if such a timecrossed tale can be said to have a real 
beginning. At some point during his unwanted stay in the future, Rip 
Hunter has met a twenty-years-older version of John Constantine, who, 
as ever, seems to be a prime mover behind the scenes in the events 
going down in this world. Prior to Hunter's escape, Constantine circa 
A.D. 2000 has told Hunter that he must find and enlist the aid of John 
Constantine circa 1987, who will help him in alerting Earth's 
super-people to the possible danger waiting in their future and thus 
avert it. This Constantine and Hunter proceed to do, crossing over into 
a couple of current books in the process, or merely making phone calls 
and writing letters if a guest appearance was too much trouble for the 
various creative teams involved--they could also talk to a few people 
in the pages of Twilight itself, this narrative providing the stuff 
that makes up this linking/framing device, as the two prophets of doom 
meet different reactions to their tale of a nightmare future waiting to 
claim the world. The mechanics of this as a crossover device, as 
explained above, allow all the creative people involved to do or not do 
whatever the hell they please while still directly or indirectly 
involving them in the concept of Twilight as a whole. Think how much 
mileage the Thor writers have got from the idea of the Norse Gods 
trying to do something to prevent Ragnarok, or fearing that Ragnarok 
was about to come upon them and I'm sure you'll get the possibilities.

Okay, so now that everybody is at least hopefully conversant with the 
concepts behind this framing/linking sequence, I'll go on to discuss 
the meat of the story, the terrible possible future that Constantine 
and Hunter are warning everybody about. To do this I'll start off with 
a brief description of the world and its background before moving on to 
give sketches of the main characters who make up the events which 
happen in this world.

The World and Its Background

The world of Twilight is not a world where the superheroes have 
deliberately taken over, but one where they have inherited the Earth 
almost by default as various social institutions started to crumble in 
the face of accelerating social change, leaving the superheroes in the 
often unwilling position of being a sort of new royalty. Even though 
government and civic authority has all but disintegrated, the various 
areas of America each have their own coteries of protecting superfolk 
to look after them, and the superheroes have thus tended to group into 
clans, each looking after a certain province. There are numerous 
"Houses" of this nature dividing America up into a kind of feudal 
barony system effectively, in terms of politics if not in terms of 
technology, which is as advanced as one might expect by 2000 A.D.
The development of this future society is something which I intend to 
go into in detail, although not here. I want to avoid the sort of 
nuke-blighted future that has been a feature of Dark Knight, Watchmen, 
Ronin and a lot of other futures presented in comic books and other 
media, like the Road Warrior films and their ilk, because I feel that 
is becoming something of a cliche, and, while it's gone some way 
towards serving its purpose and alerting people to the dangers of the 
present day by pointing out the possible effects waiting in the future, 
I personally feel that it's all but outlived its usefulness as a motif 
in Twentieth Century function and would prefer to come up with a 
different kind of holocaust. What I want to show is a world which, 
having lived through the terrors of the Fifties through the early 
Nineties with overhanging terror of a nuclear Armageddon that seemed 
inevitable at the time, has found itself faced with the equally 
inconceivable and terrifying notion that there might not be an 
apocalypse. That mankind might actually have a future, and might thus 
be faced with the terrifying prospect of having to deal with it rather 
than allowing himself the indulgence of getting rid of that 
responsibility with a convenient mushroom cloud or nine hundred. 
Following the predictions made by Alvin Toffler and other eminent 
futurologists, I want to show a future in which everything from the 
family structure to the economy is decentralizing into an entirely new 
form that, while it might ultimately be better suited to survival in 
the changed conditions of life in the Twenty-First Century, is in a 
constant and incomprehensible state of flux and chaos for those living 
through it, caught in one of those violent historical niches where one 
mode of society changes to another, such as the industrial revolution, 
for example. The people of our world find themselves going through an 
upheaval more abstract and bizarre but every bit as violent, and as 
their institutions crumble in the face of the wave of social change, 
they find themselves clinging to the various superhero clans who 
represent their only anchor of stability in this rapidly altering 
world. At the time in which our central Twilight storyline takes place, 
there are eight "Houses", each containing a different superhero clan, 
scattered across America, although as we shall see some of these are 
pretty well abandoned or non-functioning in any active sense. I'll deal 
with these one at a time, and introduce our main characters along the 
way, House by House.

The Houses of the Heroes

The Houses

House of Steel
House of Thunder
House of Titans
House of Mystery
House of Secrets
House of Justice
House of Tomorrow
House of Lanterns
House of Steel

This is one of the two most powerful clans, and it dominates the 
eastern seaboard around New York and environs. Alternatively, if I 
change my mind it could be outside America altogether and set in the 
Arctic Circle, based around a new Fortress of Solitude. This is because 
the House of Steel consists of the clan founded by Superman--we have 
Superman himself, a morally troubled figure who doesn't know what's 
best to do about the chaos he sees surrounding him, but who has come to 
accept that the Houses provide the only real permanent structure in a 
destabilizing world and are thus important to maintain. Superman has 
married and raised a couple of kids, and the person that he has married 
is Wonder Woman, who has had an identity change to Superwoman to 
accommodate her new stature--we see the genuine and powerful love 
between these two in the face of the perils of the world surrounding 
them and the desire to do what's best. They are also troubled by their 
two offspring--one of these is a new Superboy, and he's about eighteen 
when the story opens, and he's real bad news. The other child is a less 
delinquent Supergirl, a new one who, like Superboy, has been born of 
the union between Superman and Wonder Woman but who is much kinder and 
gentler, more her mother's child. Having three members in the Superman 
class and Wonder Woman (Superwoman) herself, they are obviously a clan 
to be reckoned with.
House of Thunder

The House of Thunder is the other major power, and possesses members 
with power in the same class as that of the House of Steel. The House 
of Thunder is composed of the Marvel family, plus additions. Captain 
Marvel himself is the patriarch, and is if possible even more estranged 
and troubled by the state of the world than Superman is, perhaps 
because the Marvel family are having to come to terms with the 
difficulties of having human alter egos along with everything else, a 
point I'll return to when I outline the plot. Alongside Captain Marvel, 
there is Mary Marvel, who the Captain has married more to form a bona 
fide clan in opposition to that of Superman than for any other reason. 
There is also Captain Marvel Jr., now an adult superhero every bit as 
powerful and imposing as Captain Marvel in his prime, but forced to 
labor under the eternal shadow of a senior protege. To complicate 
things, Captain Marvel Jr. and Mary Marvel are having an affair behind 
the Captain's back, Guinevere and Lancelot style, which has every bit 
as dire consequences as in the Arthurian legends. The other member of 
the Marvel clan is Mary Marvel Jr., the daughter of Captain and Mary 
Marvel Sr. Mary Jr. is fated to be part of a planned arranged marriage 
to the nasty delinquent Superboy during the course of our story, in 
order to form a powerful union between the two Houses. Peripheral to 
all this but perhaps interesting, somewhere in the House of Thunder 
(which rises up from the middle of Los Angeles over on the west coast, 
by the way) there are quarters occupied by those characters from the 
Fawcett universe who can no longer cope with life in an increasingly 
realistic and difficult outside world. These include a sad and aging 
Mr. Tawky Tawny and perhaps even Mr. Mind. Please don't laugh... I 
think I can make it work. The Houses of Steel and Thunder face each 
other across the country, with the various minor Houses and 
constellations gathered somewhere in between, vying for the power 
that's left over after the two major Houses have had their share.
House of Titans

One of the two foremost clans making up this collection of lesser 
Houses is a clan composed of the remains of the Teen Titans, now grown 
up and a hell of a lot grimmer and more frightening than they ever were 
in the past. They are led by an adult Nightwing, who, trying to emulate 
and live up to the reputation of the Batman, has become every bit as 
driven and vicious as his mentor but who lacks the depth of compassion 
and understanding that separate the Batman from all the other grim 
vigilantes. As a result, Nightwing is not an altogether nice character. 
This isn't helped by the fact that Starfire has been killed some years 
earlier during a period when all the aliens were being forcibly 
expelled from Earth by the big powers, who feared alien influence 
moving in to take advantage of the disruption and uncertainty in 
society. Other Titans who have died include Jericho, while some, 
including Kid Flash and Wonder Girl, have left the Titans to take up 
with other clans, a cause of bitterness amongst the remaining Titans. 
These include an adult version of the Hawk (formerly of the Hawk & the 
Dove) who is maybe renamed Warhawk and who only lives up to his name... 
a sort of super Rambo who Nightwing tends to use as a human weapon. 
There is also the Cyborg. Vic Stone has had some rejection problems 
with his bio-electronic parts in the time that's elapsed since our 
present day, and as a result more and more of his body has been 
replaced by mechanical parts, including one lobe of his brain. He is 
forced into considering the frightening question of when exactly 
something stops being a person and starts being a machine. How much do 
you have to take out and replace before there's just a robot left? One 
thing that helps take Stone's mind off his own problems is that he must 
keep an eye on the Changeling, who has serious problems of his own. 
When the terrors of the world finally became too much for his hokey, 
light-hearted facade, the Changeling did what he always said he'd do: 
he went crazy. Not completely crazy, but more and more these days he 
stays in animal form, or worse, in some awful halfway form between the 
human and the animal. Worse still, increasingly these days he is 
starting to adapt the forms of animals that don't exist outside the 
increasingly tortured confines of his mind. Before the story is out he 
will have adopted a new identity, calling himself the Chimera. The only 
other Titan is Raven, who is now an aging, very dignified sorceress. 
She stays with the Titans out of loyalty for the way they stayed with 
her in the past when she had troubles, but increasingly she finds 
herself drawn to the tempting notion of leaving the House of Titans and 
moving into one of the other Houses, which is far more suited for her, 
this being the next House on our agenda for discussion. (The House of 
Titans, incidentally, can be constructed around the remains of the 
original Titans Tower, although I must confess I forget exactly where 
that's situated geographically.)
House of Mystery

Nothing to do with the previous House of Mystery except in name, this 
House of Mystery is built around Baron Winter's Georgetown mansion and 
is the residence of a number of DC's supernatural characters. These 
include Jason Blood, a.k.a. the Demon, maybe the Spectre, Zatara, Dr. 
Fate and a strange amalgam of Baron Winter and Deadman. Baron Winter 
has had his mind burned out in a psychic battle some years earlier and 
is now just an empty shell, except when he's inhabited by the spirit of 
Boston Brand, who uses the Baron's body as a kind of holiday home in 
the land of the living. The other person in residence at this new House 
of Mystery is a reformed Felix Faust. The supernatural presences at the 
House have very little to do with the outside world and have instead 
devoted their pooled knowledge and talents to plumbing the depths of 
the universe's many mysteries, being all but inactive in the world of 
men.
House of Secrets

Again, similar only to its predecessor in name, this House of Secrets 
is the residence of a rough conglomerate of the few surviving 
super-villains that haven't been wiped out in an earlier Justice 
League-headed purge on super-villains which makes up part of the 
historical background of our story. The villains, all considerably 
older than today, who make up this fraternity are roughly as follows, 
subject to revision: Luthor, the Joker, Gorilla Grodd, Captain Cold, 
Catwoman, Chronos and Star Sapphire along with maybe Dr. Sivana and a 
couple of others. This House is powerful enough to defend itself 
against occasional attacks by the other hero-centered clans but isn't 
otherwise especially active and thus tends to get left alone, largely 
because the province that these villains protect, somewhere up in the 
reaches of Nevada, is just as well-looked-after as the places 
controlled by the heroes, whereby hangs some sort of moral.
House of Justice

The House of Justice, built around the remains of the JLA's old cavern 
headquarters, is the residence of the remains of the Justice League. 
These are the most important of the lesser House, along with the 
Titans. The lineup of the Justice League at the time of our story 
includes Captain Atom and the Blue Beetle, an Aqualad that has grown up 
to be the new Aquaman and a Wonder Girl who has taken on the mantle of 
Wonder Woman after Wonder Woman herself opted to become Superwoman upon 
marrying Superman. In addition to this there is the Flash (Wally West) 
and the new female Flash, Slipstream (although I prefer the name 
Joannie Quick, but this is by the by). There is also Captain Comet and 
the new female Dr. Light.
House of Tomorrow

This is the House built by all the various exiles from other eras who 
have been trapped in this world by the Time Trapper's flux. These 
include Rip Hunter and some members of the Legion, but since anyone 
passing through that strip of timestream at any time in the "future" or 
"past" would be sucked into that time zone as well, there are a 
paradoxical number of past and future selves of the various 
time-travelers also caught there, including two or three different Rip 
Hunters and two or three versions of the Legion at different stages in 
their development. Other time travelers might very well include Tommy 
Tomorrow and even maybe an earlier version of the Time Trapper himself, 
who might very well provide the help these stranded travelers need to 
return to their own times. It strikes me that amongst these travelers 
there might also be Space Ranger and Jonah Hex. This might even be an 
opportunity to return Jonah Hex to his original western continuity 
where we know he will eventually end up according to previous DC 
history. It would also be convenient to explain the so far unassigned 
radioactive hellworld that Hex's adventures have been set in as one of 
the maybe-Earths that exist in the fluke. Another possibility that 
struck me for time travelers stuck at the House of Tomorrow would be 
past selves of those DC characters who've traveled through the time 
barrier in their past adventures. One that I'd like the limited use of 
is Barry Allen, the Flash. I understand that there might be 
reservations about this, but I think I could do it all lucidly enough 
to avoid any complications. Anyway, the people at the House of Tomorrow 
aren't terribly active since they are trying their best not to 
influence events going on around them too much with an eye to possible 
repercussions in the future if they mess around with the timestream in 
the past. Also, their energies are mainly directed towards finding a 
way out of their time trap... which, as I mentioned, is a problem that 
might be solved by a past self of the Time Trapper himself.
House of Lanterns

The House of Lanterns, at the time our story opens, is abandoned and 
shattered, since all the Green Lanterns, being self-confessed agents of 
an alien power (the Guardians) have been banished from Earth during the 
anti-alien purges mentioned earlier which resulted in Starfire's death, 
and which also resulted in the banishment from Earth of the Martian 
Manhunter, the Hawks and any other alien characters I may have 
forgotten. Superman, since his own alien culture no longer exists, and 
since he has lived on Earth since infancy, has been made a citizen of 
the United States and is thus exempt--anyway, while the House of 
Lanterns no longer exists upon Earth, an emergency House of Lanterns 
has been set up upon one of the moons of Mars. (There's one that seems 
from radiotelescope scans to be either hollow or riddled with caves, 
but I can't remember whether it's Phobos or Deimos.) Here, the exiled 
Green Lanterns conspire with the other space powers, including the 
Ranns and Thanagarians to restore their power on Earth. The space 
powers, knowing through their intelligence sources of the imminent 
joining of the House of Steel and the House of Thunder by marriage are 
afraid that such a union will enable the Super/Marvel family to bring 
all the Houses under control and unify Earth as a resourceful planet 
ruled by a pantheon of invincible gods--the space people fear that such 
an empire might soon set its sights upon territories that are currently 
the province of the Hawks, Guardians or Martians. The actual Green 
Lanterns residing in the House of Lanterns at this time are a reformed 
Sinestro, Carol Ferris and Guy Gardner, Green Lanterns of Earth; Sodal 
Yat, the Daxamite "Ultimate Green Lantern" whose existence I hinted at 
in the story me and Kevin did for the Green Lantern Corps Annual, and 
maybe an aging Tomar Re, just because I'd like to see what Parrotmen 
look like when they get old.
Drunks, Hookers, and Panhandlers

The Heroes

John Constantine
Sandy's Place
The Phantom Lady
The Doll Man
Uncle Sam
Blackhawk
Plastic Man
Congorilla
Green Arrow and Black Canary
The Question
The Batman
The Shadow
The Metal Men
Robotman
Adam Strange
Other Characters
Okay, so that's about it for the Houses. Not all the superheroes, 
however, are actually members of clans. Those who aren't in clans are 
almost totally inactive, and for the most part inhabit one of the 
rundown barrio areas of either Gotham or Metropolis, both cities 
transformed beyond anything we've seen previously by the passage of 
time and change. The way I see it, the scenes in the barrio will take 
up much of the book and will probably be some of the livelier ones. The 
barrio is a superhero slum where all the old heroes come to die. As I 
see it, almost every passerby, shopkeeper and incidental background 
character there used to be some sort of super character or other twenty 
years ago. A lot of them are drunks, some of them are hookers or 
panhandlers; the majority eke whatever living they can out of dead end 
jobs, while there are a few who have actually adapted to their changed 
circumstances quite successfully and certain others who still actively 
carry on their own personal vendettas against injustice, albeit 
secretly. I'll list these various characters one at a time, mainly 
because I have fairly specific ideas about all of them that I'd like to 
get across so that you'll know who we're talking about before I get on 
to the actual plot. Most of the following have been altered almost 
beyond recognition, so this is fairly necessary.
John Constantine

Constantine is about twenty years older, but obviously hasn't changed a 
bit, except for the fact that he's living with a woman and has been for 
the past fifteen years. This woman might even turn out to be the Fever 
character that I introduced in my two part Vigilante story a while 
back. Anyway, her and Constantine are to all intents and purposes 
married, and are obviously loving it. Constantine is still into the 
same sort of scams and wheeler-dealing, and in the whole story of 
Twilight he seems to be the only character who has his finger upon all 
the pulses and knows exactly what's going on in this maze of plot and 
counterplot between the various factions involved. He thus becomes a 
central character in the story, and it strikes me that Constantine 
would probably be a logical choice to launch into his own title off the 
back of this crossover, if you're looking for characters to do that 
with.
Sandy's Place

Sandy's Place is one of the pivotal settings in our story. It's the 
main barroom in the barrio, and thus acts as a meeting point for a lot 
of the characters involved. Its proprietress is Sandra Knight, formerly 
the Phantom Lady. I'll run through the main characters who hang out at 
her joint starting with the Lady herself.
The Phantom Lady

Sandra Knight is now somewhere approaching fifty and has a sort of 
ripe, down-at-heel Joan Collins sexuality to her still. She runs the 
bar and acts as a sort of a den mother to all the regulars who drift in 
there, maybe occasionally sleeping with one of them for old times' 
sake, although never anything lasting or serious. She's a nice woman, 
doing her best to get by in a difficult world who nevertheless seems to 
have a lot of care and affection to lavish on others, as evidenced by 
her care of the next member of our cast up for discussion.
The Doll Man

Darrel Dane is probably the most unsettling and pitiful character in 
our cast, even though we don't see much of him. What has happened, 
basically, is that the constant shrinking and growing, plus the effects 
of the square cube law with regard to size increase have taken their 
toll upon him. As the years passed, his bones became brittle and would 
break easily if he stayed at normal size for too long. Eventually it 
became easier to stay at six inches tall all the time, but this itself 
was not the end to the problem--remaining at a constant six inches, 
Dane's body and brain began to adapt to their new size, redistributing 
their mass and aging their neurons for greater comfort and 
effectiveness. As a result, Dane has slowly changed shape into a 
horrible elongated insect man, still six inches high, whose bone 
structure has altered dramatically into something barely recognizable 
as anything that used to be human, although just recognizable enough to 
be disturbing. His brain has also had to change to accommodate 
drastically reduced brain size and capacity. He's still intelligent, 
but it's a non-human intelligence and he can barely communicate 
coherently with normal humans anymore. Sandra Knight has taken him 
under her wing. She keeps him in a vivarium behind the bar (it brings 
in enough money to pay for his food, and he's too alien to mind being 
displayed like this, so what the hell, although she still feels bad 
about it), and Sandy is almost the only person that the former Doll Man 
can talk to and make himself understood. She's also the only person 
unselfish enough to be able to bear the creepy little bastard running 
up her arm to nestle on her shoulder and talk into her ear in his 
eerie, piping, almost inaudible voice. Darrel Dane, while he's the only 
person other than Sandy who lives at the bar full time in his tank, is 
not the only lame duck that Sandy extends her sympathy to.
Uncle Sam

Uncle Sam in the character I'm most looking forward to writing, taking 
my cue both from the character of Uncle Sam in Robert Coover's 
excellent book about the Rosenberg execution, The Public Burning, and 
from the portrayal of Richard Nixon on Robert Altman's Secret Honor. In 
Coover's book there is a sort of giant called Uncle Sam who is exactly 
like the old Quality character right down to his dialogue, which is a 
sort of breathless rush of manic cornball philosophy and darkly lyric 
jingoism. He talks endlessly about his exploits, boasting Paul Bunyan 
fashion about how he strode across the sea, up to his red and white 
striped thighs in the deepest waters of the Pacific and rooted out his 
archenemy, the Phantom, wherever he should strike. In the Altman film, 
there is a harrowing portrait of Richard Nixon putting himself through 
a solitary self-confessional, sitting in a lonely room and vomiting his 
history into a tape recorder, helplessly spilling out all the things 
that he'll never be able to tell another living soul for fear of his 
life. All the stuff about Watergate that nobody ever suspected, all the 
stuff about Kissinger and the Shah, all the places where the bodies are 
buried. As I see my Uncle Sam, he's a hopeless derelict with no power 
at all, and nobody is even entirely sure whether he actually is the 
Uncle Sam or some wino dressed up like him. He sprawls in a dark corner 
of the bar, drinking the last years of his life away and babbling to 
himself in a mixture of the two styles outlined above, his cornball 
jingoistic reminiscences occasionally leading his erratic memory up 
alleyways in the American past down which he'd rather not stray since 
his ramblings will have a kind of dark poetry to them. I see him acting 
as a sort of surreal Greek Chorus or something, his senile monologues 
having suggestive resonance within the main framework of the story. He 
is one of the other social cripples that Sandy can always find a free 
drink for, even though he is not an actual physical cripple yet, 
despite the fact that his liver is obviously deteriorating rapidly. The 
only actual physical cripple to regularly visit Sandy's Place is our 
next character for discussion.
Blackhawk

For a few issues it might not even be apparent that Blackhawk is a 
cripple. This is because he has a perfect pair of prosthetic legs to 
replace his own legs which, Douglas Barder style, are now missing. He 
is a sinister and obsessive figure, still fighting a private war inside 
his head which has never quite been the same since the mission in which 
all his teammates died and in which he lost his legs. He lives in a 
single room in the barrio, paid for out of the remains of the fortune 
that once funded Blackhawk Island. I figure at some point in the Second 
World War he got his hands on some Nazi gold and still has a reserve of 
it somewhere, albeit a dwindling one. Gold is more than ever a firm 
economic unit in the chaotic economic flux situation of this future 
world, so he could probably afford to live a less Spartan existence. He 
just doesn't want to, rising at five every morning and strapping on his 
legs before working out in the gym and the flight simulator that he 
keeps at a secret location downtown. In the evenings he maybe calls in 
at Sandy's for a glass of Perrier before going on to cruise around the 
barrio's leather bars. At the bars, he singles out young men according 
to some system known only to him and offers them employment in some 
unspecified endeavor--we eventually find out that he is recruiting a 
new squadron of Blackhawks to replace his dead friends, and that he has 
seven F-III bombers hidden in a massive underground hangar that he has 
invested the remains of his gold into. He picks up boys and asks their 
names--maybe one of them says, "My name's Charles." Blackhawk pats him 
on the shoulder and smiles and says, "I think I'll call you Chuck." A 
boy called Andrew becomes Andre and so on--Blackhawk is a sort of 
obsessive urban fascist with a survivalist mentality and a strong 
sociopathic streak. He is obviously building up his squadron of vicious 
leatherqueen Blackhawks and equipping them to act out some terrible 
version of his own internal holocaust. You can take the boy out of the 
war, but you sometimes can't take the war out of the boy, and 
Blackhawk's new squadron will almost certainly figure prominently in 
the explosive climax to this series.
Plastic Man

Like most of the old Quality characters, Plastic Man often calls by at 
Sandy's before moving on uptown to look for trade--Plastic Man is a 
male prostitute or gigolo or whatever the polite term might be. Thanks 
to his elastic consistency, he can keep himself looking young and 
attractive for a lot longer than many of his fellows, and it is this 
facet of his talent that he now exploits for a living. He is employed 
by the Seductive Winks escort agency, managed by one W. Winks. He is, 
in fact, the only employee of the agency. He is likable and kind 
despite his shady occupation, and everyone gets on with him--with 
traces of his past as Eel O'Brien finally starting to show through, he 
is a sort of active and romantic neighborhood hoodlum who always 
dresses well and buys flowers for old ladies and drinks for bums and 
apples for kids. There is a more somber side to him that he probably 
only reveals to old friends like Sandy, who is the only person that 
he'll sleep with for nothing these days. Although he seems permanently 
youthful, he has started to notice a lessening of the elasticity in the 
skin around his lower back. It's becoming saggy and feels like crepe, 
like something that has been stretched once or twice too often and is 
becoming shapeless. Plastic Man has a sort of horrible half formed 
vision in his head that he doesn't like to think about concerning how 
he might finally end up. He might end up as just a puddle--he often 
wakes up screaming in the dead of the night from dreams about this, and 
the shades that he habitually wears now are there to hide the tired and 
worried look around his eyes as much as anything else. Woozy Winks is a 
roguishly half-likable but mostly disgusting old pimp who will get a 
phone call from Kathy Kane (yeah, I know the Earth-One Batwoman died, 
but the one on Earth-Two didn't and has presumably been living in 
anonymous retirement on Earth-Composite ever since the Crisis) and 
notify Plas, who will go round to her mansion to keep Ms. Kane company 
for the evening, giving Woozy a cut of the subsequent moneys. I see 
Plastic Man as being a sort of reluctant hero who'll come through in 
the end.
Okay... those are the main characters who hang out at Sandy's, although 
most of the other characters pass through from time to time. These 
include:
Congorilla

Another character that I'm looking forward to doing, and one of the 
nastiest characters in our assembled cast. Basically, what has happened 
to Bill is that he got old. His human body got older and older while at 
the rub of a ring he could transmit his body to that of a powerful and 
immortal sacred golden gorilla. Ask yourself, what would you do? 
Anyway, Bill eventually decided to stay in the body of the gorilla 
forever and now is quite a wealthy and successful local businessman, a 
golden gorilla wearing a business suit and even managing to talk just 
about recognizably, even if some of it has to be done in sign language. 
The sort of operation he runs is a sort of lucrative small time 
criminal organization that services the bars and the gambling dens and 
the brothels and also supplies most of the barrio's drug traffic. His 
activities will bring him into contact with lots of the other 
characters... putting protection pressure on Sandy's bar, for example, 
or having Woozy Winks beaten up for non-union pimping, and assuming 
that the barrio is set in the remains of Gotham, which I'm starting to 
favor more and more, then effectively he becomes the new "Gorilla Boss 
of Gotham City". He has a dark secret in his closet, however... almost 
literally. The body of Congo Bill, now over ninety years old, refuses 
to die. The gorilla mind that has been trapped in it unfairly refuses 
to let go and is hanging on with a fierce and horrible willpower. 
Unable to bring himself to kill it outright, Congorilla keeps the 
shackled and naked old man in special rooms at his apartment, feeds it 
garbage and hopes it will die soon, but it doesn't. It just lies in the 
corner and snarls weakly when he enters and fixes him with its ancient 
glaring eyes as he gives it its food.
Green Arrow and Black Canary

Oliver and Dinah have both retired from costumed crimefighting and are 
now coeditors of a small but vital and thriving radical newspaper that 
serves the barrio and will be useful in getting over background 
information quickly and stylishly. Oliver and Dinah are two of the 
nicest and most normal people in the series, both fiercely committed 
and tireless in their efforts, both loving each other very much despite 
the violent rows that they have learned to weather and almost come to 
enjoy as part of their relationship. Their paper is called Black 
Feathers, and on its masthead there is a symbol of a drawn-back arrow 
about to be fired, fletched with black flight feathers.
The Question

The Question is a freelance investigator... a sort of masked Philip 
Marlowe who doesn't make very much money and who usually ends up taking 
cases just for the interest or the moral necessity. He's quite good 
friends with Oliver and Dinah and often gives them the inside dope on 
situations that he has knowledge of for reporting in Black Feathers. 
Him and Oliver have strong political differences but are firm friends 
despite this. When our story opens, the Question is investigating an 
impossible locked-room murder mystery involving a midget and a 
6'6"-tall call girl into heavy bondage. Don't worry, I'll explain 
later. It's all vitally relevant.
The Batman

Nobody's actually seen him for years. He's rumored to be around, he's 
rumored to be active, and rumored to be doing something, but nobody 
knows what or even really if. He might have died years ago.
The Shadow

See The Batman.
In actual fact, these two crime-fighters have joined forces in a 
clandestine bid to rid the Earth of the oppressive and dominating 
superhero Houses forever, so that mankind can get on with its own 
destiny. We won't learn this until later in the series, although they 
play a big part in the ending. As an aside, are Tarzan and Doc Savage 
in the public domain yet? No big deal, but I'd really like a sort of 
secret council of the immortals: Batman, the Shadow, Doc Savage and 
Tarzan, all planning to start the revolution that will rid Earth of the 
super-people forever. Being basically more elemental forces than 
people, these characters have remained exactly the same, except they 
got tougher.

The Metal Men

Very few of these survive. Platinum is working as a waitress in a sort 
of weird sci-fi autosex bar, while Iron is working as a construction 
worker, slowly corroding and losing his faculties as the rust claims 
his mind. No hope of a resurrection should he be damaged, since creator 
Will Magnus passed away years ago. Tin is destroyed, as is Mercury. 
Gold has gone into hiding, mainly because of the fact that, as 
mentioned earlier, gold is more in demand than ever, and there are a 
lot of people who would like to capture him and melt him down. We get 
to see Gold towards the end, but he isn't much in evidence throughout 
the rest of the series. The Metal Man with the strangest fate is Lead. 
who has become an animated part of the shielding surrounding a 
closed-down nuclear reactor that is still considered to be dangerous. 
As a result of his activities, Lead is radioactive and will not be able 
to go near anyone for about six million years. The Metal Men are not 
major characters, but I think we should be able to get some darkly 
comic stuff out of them, as well as a lot of genuine poignance.
Robotman

Still alive and clanking after all these years, this former Doom Patrol 
member is one of the few people hanging around the barrio who still has 
an ear amongst the superheroes in the Houses. He is friendly with 
Cyborg, of the Titans, who he is maybe helping to adjust to his new, 
mostly robotic, state. He also has contact with the Justice League, 
since he was once close to the Teen Titans and since three ex-Titans... 
Wonder Girl, Kid Flash and Aqualad... are now amongst the Justice 
League membership. Mostly, though, he just hangs around the barrios, 
maybe going out for an evening at the cinema with Platinum when she's 
finished work, or calling by at the construction site to talk to Iron. 
I figure a character who can cross the social boundaries will be 
useful, and it's nice to have someone from the Doom Patrol represented.
Adam Strange

Adam Strange is trapped on Earth, but is still in contact with the 
alien alliance based around the new House of Lanterns on the moon of 
Mars. He is a sort of a mole, and he will eventually figure largely in 
the aliens' plan to invade Earth and "liberate" it from superhero 
dominance. We see him around a lot, but don't realize who he is until 
near the end of the series.
Other Characters

There are maybe other characters that I don't have anything clear in 
mind for as yet but who I'll want to include when the time comes. I 
figure I ought to list them here, so that any real problems can be 
sorted in advance. I might want to use the Challengers of the Unknown, 
the Golden Age Flash, Roy Raymond, Bobo the Detective Chimp, Johnny 
Quick, the Black Condor, the Ray, Sarge Steel and perhaps a few old 
villains from here and there. One thing that this series will enable us 
to do, if it should be called for, is to simply introduce a new and 
revamped group like the Challengers of the Unknown as an established 
fact, to try them out on the reader before launching them in a new 
title, which should be borne in mind.
The Plot

The Framing Device
The Central Plot Okay, I think that's about it as far as the character 
sketches go, so I'll get down to a sketchy outline of the central plot. 
This is the area I have the least worked out in detail, although I have 
the overall picture pretty clearly, so maybe I'll just trust to luck 
and hope it comes together as I go along. If not, I hope you'll bear 
with me and I'll clarify and polish the weak points at some later date. 
As before, since the plot comes in two sections, with the central 
narrative and the framing/linking device, I'll discuss the plot in two 
parts for the sake of greater clarity, starting with a description of 
the events that make up the framing sequence. As before, since this is 
a time travel story, telling things in a chronological sequence is 
sometimes difficult to do without getting muddled, but I'll give it my 
best shot:
The Framing Device

The plot of the framing device is as follows: the story starts at its 
ending in a one-page prologue that takes place at the end of 1987 in a 
bar someplace in New York. John Constantine sits drinking alone, 
looking very bitter and pissed off at somebody or other. A striking and 
personable blonde enters the bar and, noticing Constantine, leans over 
and asks him for a light. Constantine, sitting there with a crumpled 
letter in one bunched fist and a glass in the other, glances up at her 
and then stares at her as if transfixed. We close up on his face and 
then move into flashback. Basically, the whole series is what passes 
through Constantine's mind in the two seconds it takes him to respond 
to the girl asking him for a light.
We flash back to the beginning of 1987, when Constantine is surprised 
by a visit from Rip Hunter, who he doesn't know but who appears to know 
everything about Constantine, including some very personal details that 
Constantine has never told a living soul about. Intrigued, Constantine 
listens to Hunter's story. Hunter tells him about how he's been 
marooned in time for subjective months, stranded at the House of 
Tomorrow in the world of Twilight. Hunter tells him about how, in this 
world, he had met up with an older version of John Constantine who was 
somehow instrumental in Hunter's escape back to his own time after the 
events to be chronicled in Twilight have concluded. This elder 
Constantine, explaining about the flux that exists in the timestream, 
explains that there is a better than good chance that of the potential 
future Earths waiting in the fluke down the timestream from our 
present, this future Earth is the one most likely to actually happen, 
with all of its chaos and carnage. It's a world of war, and it ends 
with all of the super-beings being either killed or exiled from Earth 
forever. Giving Hunter enough personal information to convince the 
younger Constantine and get him to aid Hunter in his mission to alert 
the people concerned and avert this nightmare future, the elder 
Constantine sends Hunter back in time with his dire story of horrors 
waiting in the future that must be averted. Hearing Hunter's tale 
(although the readers don't hear it all at first) Constantine the 
younger is convinced enough to help the time traveler contact some of 
the various personages affected and tell them the bits of the story 
that are relevant to them, maybe in their own books or maybe in 
Twilight itself. This framing device has its own resolution, but I'll 
leave that till later.

The Central Plot

This is the main central plot of Twilight, being the story that Hunter 
tells Constantine and that Constantine passes on to the other parties 
involved, and it deals with the world of the Twilight. I don't have it 
broken down issue by issue or anything, but the rough shape is 
something like this: In the middle 1995 or earlier, when society was 
starting to break down, many of the villains on Earth tried to take 
advantage of this situation by exploiting the uncertainty and disaster. 
Incensed by this, the current Justice League decide to go on the 
offensive for the first time and plan a careful campaign that will 
remove all the super-villains forever. They enlist the aid of a lot of 
other superheroes in this, and they are mostly very effective. So 
effective, in fact, that they begin to be seen as the only effective 
force for reason and order in a fast crumbling world. This goes to the 
assembled heroes' heads a little, and in an attempt to secure their new 
power base they pass a majority motion outlawing aliens from Earth. 
While this is passed and is rigorously enforced, it is one of the 
decisions that causes the first serious rift in the ranks of the 
assembled super-doers, with some small groups like the Titans starting 
to drift away from the main group. This process continues until the 
state of the ruling Houses is pretty much as described above, with the 
House of Secrets containing the only super-villains to survive the 
purge other than those who reformed, and the House of Lanterns 
demolished upon Earth and temporarily relocated upon Mars pending the 
planned secret invasion. At the start of our story proper, there is 
quite a lot of different activity going on in the various camps. The 
Houses of Steel and Thunder, each suffering their own internal 
stresses, are preparing for the marriage of the delinquent Superboy 
with Mary Marvel Jr., daughter of the Captain and Mary Sr. This is a 
development that causes considerable anxiety all over the place: 
previously, even the two most powerful Houses could not attempt to 
exert any pressure upon the others for fear that the other Houses would 
unite against them. Both Houses knew that individually they couldn't 
hope to take on the assembled might of the Titans, Justice League and 
others. This preserved a status quo of sorts. However, with the 
prospect of an alliance in the offing, it seems quite possible that the 
assembled forces of three people with the power of Superman, four 
people with the power of Captain Marvel and Wonder Woman into the 
bargain could easily smash the most firm resistance. This prospect 
worries both the Houses of Titans and Justice tremendously. It also 
worries the villains remaining at the House of Secrets who remember 
back to the purges of the nineties and shudder. It certainly alarms the 
people living in the barrio, who, though downtrodden, still have a 
certain amount of liberty, impoverished though it be, and are not 
actually living under the absolute dictatorship that could result from 
a marriage between the Houses of Steel and Thunder. The other major 
party alarmed by the prospect are the assembled alien forces that are 
conspiring out on the moon of Mars. They don't like the thought of a 
planet ruled by an unstoppable superhuman elite purely because it might 
very quickly pose a threat to the aliens' own well-being. Their plan is 
cryptic, but we learn a bit of it at a time. The main thrust of their 
plan is that they intend to use Adam Strange's place as their agent on 
Earth to set up a Zeta Beam link through which an inviting army of 
Hawkpeople, super-powered green Martians and members of the Green 
Lantern Corps could materialize in the center of Times Square or 
somewhere, this plan being linked to a Thanagarian Plan that has to be 
abandoned in the current issues of Swamp Thing, resurrected here to 
much more spectacular purpose.
Okay, so that's the rough background. Down at Sandy's the bums are 
hanging out, Uncle Sam muttering in the corner, Plastic Man dropping by 
for a drink with Blackhawk before they both go to cruise the bars 
uptown, Doll Man scuttling around his vivarium and so on. Oliver and 
Dinah are publishing their newspaper, with the Question occasionally 
dropping by for a political argument with Ollie or to pass on a bit of 
information. His current case is one that has him totally mystified: a 
midget turned up at a rough trade bar, was seen by witnesses, finally 
vanishing to an upstairs room with a very tall, very beautiful call 
girl that nobody had ever seen before. When the door was broken down, 
this after nobody had emerged from the room for some several hours, the 
body of the midget was found bound and gagged, with his neck broken by 
a single clean blow. The room was locked with no other possible exit. 
The call girl was gone. There was no murder weapon. This little 
conundrum will continue to puzzle them throughout the series until we 
get a few shaking revelations at the end.

In the Houses themselves, things are unsettled. At the House of Steel, 
both Superman and Super(Wonder)woman are worried about their delinquent 
son and his increasingly-difficult-to-conceal tendencies towards sadism 
and sociopathic behavior. They are also worried about their daughter, 
who they cannot find a suitable suitor for, since Captain Marvel Jr. 
doesn't appear to be interested in her. Captain Marvel Jr.'s 
disinterest is largely due to the fact that he is madly and 
passionately in love with Mary Marvel Sr., and is liaising with her 
behind Captain Marvel Sr.'s back. Their relationship has grown 
difficult of late, largely because the increasingly erratic and cranky 
behavior of the Captain seems to have taken a turn for the worse. All 
of the Marvel family have had problems with the fact that they have two 
sets of bodies neither of which ever age in the slightest but Mary and 
Junior have solved this by more or less giving up their human 
identities. This doesn't worry them, mainly because they are a lot 
closer to the age of their counterpart than, say, Billy Batson is to 
his alter ego. (I should point out that for reasons I've yet to find a 
good explanation for, the Marvel family seem to grow, in their 
superhuman forms, to an ideal age, and then stop. Thus, Mary and Junior 
are both around twenty-five in their superhuman forms, as is Captain 
Marvel himself, since he is already the ideal age and hasn't grown up 
any more in the intervening years. All three are still children if they 
happen to say Shazam, but the only one who still uses the word is the 
Big Red Cheese himself, unable to give up his human self as Mary and 
Junior have done. Hanging on to his Billy Batson identity has caused a 
lot of problems for the Captain, as well as in his relationship with 
his wife, but these seem to have become a lot better recently. Now, 
however, there is a new element that is perhaps even more threatening. 
Whereas before Captain Marvel was wrapped up enough in his personal 
problems to leave Mary and Junior lots of time together, lately he has 
started to make more normal marital demands upon Mary's time. He's even 
being extra nice to her, which worries her like anything. There are 
other oddities of behavior... the Captain will no longer go down and 
sit and talk with Mr. Tawky Tawny as had been a regular habit of his. 
In the midst of all this, there are problems with Mary Jr., who really 
doesn't want to marry Superboy at all.

In the background of all this we see John Constantine moving around 
amongst the various characters, gathering a bit of information here and 
there, obviously conducting some plan that he has in mind. (Remember 
this is the older Constantine we're talking about here.) He seems to be 
paying particular attention to the areas of stress between the various 
Houses, and it becomes quickly apparent that although he's older he's 
still in the habit of manipulating people in various cryptic ways for 
reasons unclear to anyone but himself.
As things progress, we see the paranoia concerning the coming wedding 
between the Houses of Steel and Thunder amongst the lesser Houses start 
to come to a boiling point. The Titans, directed by a ruthless and 
embittered Nightwing, maybe approach the Justice League proposing that 
the two Houses should join forces, along with maybe the villains in the 
House of Secrets, to stand against the possible threat of being overrun 
by the Houses of Steel and Thunder. Maybe an uneasy alliance is formed 
between the three Houses, although the Houses of Mystery and Tomorrow 
are not at all interested in joining in. A plan starts to emerge for a 
massed attack upon the Houses of Steel and Thunder, perhaps even on the 
wedding day itself, in the hope that both Houses can be eliminated and 
the country divided up between the victors. Meanwhile, we see Blackhawk 
continuing to recruit his new Blackhawks, and we see Constantine 
starting to step up his plan, making contact with more and more of the 
people he's going to need to accomplish it. For one thing, we see him 
finally manage to make contact with the elite council of the Shadow, 
the Batman and maybe Doc Savage and Tarzan as well, and learn of their 
plan to oust all the superheroes from Earth. Constantine seems eager to 
help them with this, although we aren't sure about how much of a double 
game he's playing. He also makes contact with Adam Strange, and through 
gaining Strange's confidence learns of the alien's planned attack upon 
Earth. Constantine seems eager to help with this plan as well. In fact, 
as Constantine brushes against the various groups involved, it becomes 
clear that he is promising his undivided assistance to all of them. It 
is maybe during this period that he calls at the House of Tomorrow and 
makes the acquaintance of Rip Hunter, who also figures in his plans. 
Beyond this, he also spends a lot of time hanging out with the Question 
and around the offices of Black Feathers, seeming to be everywhere at 
once as he works his dubious and incomprehensible scheme.

As the plot builds up in momentum, it is this ingenious and baffling 
juggling act of Constantine's that becomes the main attraction. We see 
him urging on the Justice League/Titans to their attack upon the Houses 
of Thunder and Steel, and yet we see him call at the House of Thunder 
and speak to Captain Marvel himself, telling him of the planned attack. 
This is a key scene: Constantine tells the Captain of the attack and 
asks him not to do anything to help the House of Steel in the thick of 
the battle. When the Captain politely asks Constantine why he should do 
this when he is, after all, supposedly intend upon cementing the union 
between the Houses of Steel and Thunder. Lighting a cigarette, 
Constantine smiles and says that he thinks the Captain already knows 
what the reasons are. The Captain flinches back from the match as 
Constantine strikes it with a look of terror which passes, changing 
into a smile at Constantine's cleverness. He agrees to go along with 
Constantine so far as it suits his own plans.

While urging the Titans/Justice League to strike while the iron his hot 
and simultaneously urging Captain Marvel not to defend his allies, 
Constantine is at the same time urging the Batman/Shadow group to hold 
back in their attack upon the super powers until a more advantageous 
time. After he has explained his plan to them, although not to the 
reader, they agree. On top of all this, Constantine is acting as a 
fifth columnist to the planned alien invasion through Adam Strange. He 
urges Strange to commence the alien invasion after the Titans/League 
and the Houses of Steel and Thunder have had a chance to weaken and 
decimate each other at the wedding. This sounds sensible, and they 
readily agree. As if this wasn't thoroughly confusing enough, 
Constantine also has a number of other irons in the fire. In the barrio 
he is seen at various times searching for two people. One of these is 
the vanished Metal Man, Gold. The other is an old crippled man who is 
reputed to live somewhere in the barrio that nobody knows the history 
of. Eventually, Constantine finds both of these. Gold, after leading 
him on with some story or other, he tricks cruelly and has melted down. 
The old man, when he finds him, he is much more careful with. I don't 
know when I'll reveal the information, but this old man is in fact 
Metron, formerly of the New Gods, banished to Earth for some treachery 
that he's committed in the past when the temptation to uncover new 
knowledge became too much for the feeble moral restraints that he 
places upon himself. What Constantine wants with Metron is fairly 
straightforward: He wants the Moebius chair, although we don't find out 
why until later. I should point out that these various plot threads 
will be spread out dramatically, intercut with developments in the 
lives of the other characters, so it won't all be about John 
Constantine, endearing though I obviously find him. For example, while 
planning their raid upon the Houses of Steel and Thunder, the assembled 
Houses of Titans, Justice and Secrets will attempt to pressgang various 
heroes in the barrio into their army, with mixed results. Some of the 
barrio heroes either reluctantly or willingly go along with the 
revolutionary Houses, while some other people are enlisted by 
Constantine to aid in his master plan. When we finally have the various 
factions set up and defined, even if there are some ambiguous areas, we 
let the climactic fireworks commence.

On the wedding day, the planned attack by the Titans, Justice League 
and villains upon the Houses of Steel and Thunder gets underway. The 
losses are heavy upon both sides. Wonder Woman (the former Wonder Girl) 
is killed in battle by Superwoman (formerly Wonder Woman) who is 
herself killed by Captain Atom. Superboy is also killed, along with 
most of the Justice League, Titans and super-villains. Captain Marvel, 
who has been expecting the attack after being warned by Constantine, is 
unharmed, while Captain Marvel Jr. And Mary Marvel decide to take 
advantage of the confusion to flee into space, where they hope to make 
a new home. Supergirl goes with them. This leaves only Captain Marvel 
and a badly battered Superman standing amongst the bruised and bloodied 
remnants of an army of beaten superheroes. The attempted coup by the 
Titans/League has been successfully repulsed, and three Houses lie 
shattered, but all that remain of the two most powerful Houses of all 
are the two archetypal superheroes, standing back to back, waiting for 
what's going to be thrown at them next.

This turns out to be the alien invasion. Arriving by Zeta Beam, an army 
of Hawkmen, Lanterns and Martians pour into Earth and quickly get rid 
of what remains of the armies recruited by the Houses of Titans, 
Justice and Secrets in their failed attempt at a coup. They then 
advance upon the main palaces. Superman isn't worried, since with 
Captain Marvel by his side the two of them should still be just about 
powerful enough to send the invaders packing.

This is where the surprise card is played. Captain Marvel isn't Captain 
Marvel. Captain Marvel has been dead ever since the story opened.

It had all started with little Billy Batson and his problem. There he 
was, unwilling to give up being human, still spending a lot of time in 
a child's body. The unfortunate thing was that though little Billy's 
body didn't age, his mind did. Trapped in a child's body but afflicted 
with adult needs, Billy went quietly... well, bats, I suppose. A lot of 
the problems were sexual. Physically, Billy was not capable of normal 
sex and thus pretty soon began to experiment with more bizarre 
variations such as S&M, visiting the appropriate bars in clothing that 
made him look as grown-up as possible while he still had the face and 
body of a child. At a certain club on a certain night, Billy had met a 
strikingly tall call girl who seemed to meet his every fantasy 
requirement. They went to a room upstairs together and locked it from 
within. Billy was tied up, and then agreed to be gagged. At this point 
the call girl began to melt and change shape, shimmering as if through 
a heat haze before Billy's startled eyes. In the end, instead of a six 
foot six human woman, Billy is staring at a seven and a half foot tall 
green Martian man. It is J'onn J'onzz, the Martian Manhunter, on Earth 
incognito using his power of disguise. Billy, being gagged, cannot say 
Shazam and turn into Captain Marvel. Nor can he prevent the Manhunter 
snapping his neck with one blow of his hand. The Manhunter then walks 
out invisibly through the walls and leaves a dead midget and an 
insoluble mystery. The Manhunter has assumed the Captain's identity, 
being able to convincingly duplicate his powers, in order to catch 
Superman by surprise when the alien invasion finally comes. This is why 
he flinched when Constantine struck a match and why he didn't mind 
letting the three rebel Houses and the House of Steel tear each other 
to bits.
Upon realising how he has been set up, Superman fights with the Martian 
Manhunter, killing him with his heat vision. However, by this point it 
is too late, and the assembled Martians and Green Lanterns have 
arrived. We have a powerful and intense sequence where Superman manages 
to smash his way through a lot of the alien forces single-handed while 
being ring-whipped by the Lanterns, only to finally be beaten to death 
in single combat by the massive and frighteningly powerful Sodal Yat. 
The alien invasion is a complete success, and the coalition forces of 
the Martians, Guardians and Thanagarians will now govern Earth forever 
and keep it nice and peaceful. It seems that in his dealings, 
Constantine's plan has gone awry, unless he actually meant to impose an 
alien dictatorship upon the Earth.

It is at this point that the final pieces fall into place. The alien 
conquerors find themselves suddenly attacked by a small army of 
superheroes, these mostly being those recruited by Constantine as well 
as the forces of the council made up of Batman, the Shadow, etc. Most 
of these are wearing thin golden armor, made from the body of the 
unfortunate Gold, which renders the otherwise omnipotent power rings of 
the Green Lanterns useless. The aliens are driven back and contained by 
the surprise attack of the others, and the battle seems to come to a 
Mexican standoff when one of the Hawkpeople or Green Lanterns points 
out that however valiantly the heroes fight, there is a massive army of 
combined extraterrestrial warriors ready to keep pouring onto the Earth 
until all resistance is squashed. It is at this point that Constantine 
plays his trump card.

Using the Moebius chair of Metron, Constantine has visited the 
antimatter universe of Qward. In return for a firm promise of immunity 
for the planet Earth and its immediate system, Constantine has then 
sold them the secret of the Boom Tube, which he has also managed to 
wheedle from Metron. Thus, while the assembled aliens are preparing to 
pour into Earth via Zeta Beam, Thanagar, new Mars, Rann and Oa are 
currently being overrun by a vast army of Qwardian weaponeers.

Stunned, the aliens are forced to return quickly to their respective 
homes to fight wars upon their own soil that may take them centuries to 
win, if they win them at all. For the most part, the only heroes left 
on Earth are the non-powered variety, and most of these are more than 
prepared to take off their masks and go public. Constantine explains to 
them that under the guidance of the Batman, the Shadow and all the 
rest, American society, free of government or a super-dictatorship, 
will start to organize itself along different lines, so that it can 
deal with the future without fear or anxiety. The days of the big 
powers are over, and henceforth America will be built up from much 
smaller and more flexible units, both socially and economically. The 
story of Twilight ends with a delighted John Constantine standing at 
the verge of a new utopia, free from the interferences of power, all 
superfolk banished from Earth for ever.

Of course, the story that he gives to Rip Hunter to take back to his 
past self, while it gives the gist of all this, doesn't give the whole 
story. This comes home to the younger Constantine right at the very end 
of the series, when we wrap up the framing device.

Somewhere earlier on in the continuity, we'll have a scene where 
somebody says to Constantine that if he isn't careful, one day he'll 
run into somebody craftier than himself and get into a whole mess of 
trouble, to which Constantine replies confidently and with some 
justification that there isn't anybody smarter than him.

At the very end of the series, he finds out differently. Having 
contacted all the hero groups and people involved and met with varying 
responses, Constantine is disturbed. Has he failed? Some of the people 
he warned have taken his advice, some haven't. Some he hasn't been able 
to reach at all. He is still thinking of this event in the future as 
being a terrible thing, and he fears that he might not have averted it 
well enough. All he has for consolation is the knowledge that according 
to Hunter, at some point in this future, he's going to meet a woman who 
he will love very much for the rest of his life and who will fill a big 
lonely hole in him. He even knows, thanks to Hunter, how he will meet 
her. She'll come up to him in a bar and ask him for a light; their eyes 
will meet and that will be that...

While he is musing over the pros and cons of this Hunter delivers the 
last part of his message from the future Constantine, which he has been 
instructed not to give to the younger Constantine until after he has 
warned as many people as he can. Surprised, Constantine reads what may 
turn out to be the ultimate "Dear John" letter. Written by his future 
self, the letter apologizes for using his younger self so cynically, 
but assures John the younger that it's all for the best. The older 
Constantine having the advantage of hindsight, can remember everything 
that happened to his younger self, including meeting with Rip Hunter, 
getting told a terrible story and then launching on a mission to warn 
everybody affected of what waited in their future and how they might 
avert it. The elder Constantine can even remember how that all worked 
out: The world of Twilight came about anyway, often because of people's 
actions in response to his warning. He can even remember getting a 
letter handed to him, exactly the same as this one. He muses briefly 
over the paradox of who really wrote the letter originally before 
apologizing to his younger self again and consoling him with the fact 
that a wonderful woman is waiting in his near future, and that she will 
be worth everything.

Reading the letter, the younger Constantine is furious. It has turned 
out that there is someone craftier than John Constantine... namely, 
John Constantine twenty years older and smarter. Constantine has been 
conned by himself. Worse, since the person who tricked him is twenty 
years away in an unreachable future, Constantine has no way of getting 
vengeance upon the person who did this to him. Angered and enraged, he 
goes into a bar and sits with the crumpled letter in his hand, getting 
drunk. This is the end of the story, and we only have a final one-page 
epilogue that takes us back to the beginning, now that we've come full 
circle. The woman enters the bar and notices John, asking him for a 
light. He looks up and their eyes meet. She is beautiful. He knows 
instantly that he could love this woman forever. Knows who she is, 
knows how happy him and all his future selves are going to be with 
her... and finally, perversely, he understands how he can have his 
revenge against his future self, how he can avert the circumstances 
that lead to Twilight by throwing a small but important spanner into 
the workings of destiny.

"Excuse me, have you got a light?"

Constantine looks at her and blinks twice before replying.

"No. I'm sorry. I don't smoke."

The woman shrugs, and after a while leaves the bar without speaking to 
Constantine any further. After she's gone he sits, dead drunk at a 
dimly lit corner table, and cries his cold and cynical heart out.

And that's it. I hope you can see how it's meant to fulfill all the 
requirements mentioned earlier. There are opportunities for new 
characters to get a springboard, old characters to get a shot in the 
arm and all the merchandising you can handle in terms of games and 
stuff, at least as I see it. The warring Houses idea sounds ideal for 
role-playing games, or maybe even a video game. The overall continuity 
is hopefully enhanced without being damaged in any irreversible way, 
and I think we might get a damn good yarn out of it in the bargain. 
Anyway, I seem to have gone on far longer than I intended, so I better 
wrap this up. I'll be looking forward with interest to hearing what any 
of you have to say about all this when you've had a chance to read it. 
If any sections are incomprehensible and need clarifying then please 
give me a call.
Return to Projects Page
Return to Library
Return to Museum Lobby


